# PODNETS



Problem ​Statement:  Susceptibility of power and communication network infrastructure to the natural calamities and other disasters poses a big problem for the responders and the survivors. Stranded community members can not reach each other and the rescuers quickly. On the other hand, the rescuers have hard time to stay connected among themselves and receive SOS on time.
Solution ​Statement:  PODNETS helps to communicate people using smartphones where the regular cellular networks are damaged following a calamity. It is an app based, infrastructure less, ad-hoc, instant group messaging and local map and SOS service solution. It can be readily deployed by the community members or by the responders. For a cluster of less than ten nearby people, the messaging and map service can be provided just by the individual cell phones pre-installed with the app. For more than one cluster, PODNETS needs to deploy drone access points (AP) for inter cluster communication over Wi-Fi direct. Each of the APs of the drones are multi-role APs to be connected to its cluster members over Wifi and inter drone communication will happen using Wi-Fi Direct as back-haul.
Users: Post-disaster responders and the disaster-survivors are the target users and beneficiaries of PODNETS. Apart from that, a group of people who explore remote geographical areas with no communication networks available, can still stay connected among themselves using PODNETS. 
            The responders or/and the community members need to have access to a portable, easy to deploy, scalable and energy efficient network solution. It should provide quick access to group and personal messaging, SOS and map services to establish connectivity among the community members and rescuers. This would make post-disaster rescue operations easier and faster to perform. Survivors can find and send SOS or texts to the nearest responder or fellow members with minimum effort involved. Responders can communicate among themselves using the same network.
             Clearly, PODNETS can benefit the above mentioned users by readily bring them back to a locally connected network among themselves. The user-friendliness and instant messaging by the app from a common mobile devices enhance the acceptability of PODNETS among all. 
              We conducted a small survey on our lab-members as users to identify the needs of a disaster survivor and responder in a war zone and found rapidness of deployment and ease of using a system are the key while designing a solution for critical scenarios.
Community/Location: PODNETS is deployable in all above-the-surface communities irrespective of geographic location. Any community, no matter how remote or at geographically isolated location they are at, may get disconnected from the rest of the world and among themselves after being affected by a disaster. In such a situation they can quickly reconnect with a local network and emergency communication links using PODNETS. 
     Where the power grids and the communication networks are down due to severe calamity or have limited availability, PODNETS can play pivotal role to bring the unconnected community members and responders of the affected region back on a locally connected off-the-grid communication network. 
          Last but not the least, for an isolated group of explorers or any other workforce on surface can use PODNETS  to stay connected locally among themselves.
Technical Feasibility: Schematic Architecture: PODNETS are designed exploiting wifi (IEEE 802.11) and wifi direct connectivity. Wifi direct standard is released by wifi alliance to enable communication between nearby devices on 2.4 GHz or 5 GHz band. PODNETS boasts of an user friendly app that are capable of automatic multi-hop ad-hoc network formation using geographical routing. PODNETS app provides option for one touch SOS broadcast among the local community members and nearby group of responders. Moreover, the unique feature of mapping the user phone number as the PODNETS user's primary ID for group messaging and SOS, helps responder and other community members to identify the survivors easily during a disaster. When the network grows PODNETS does have multi-mode operation that allows to create small clusters of less than 10 members and to be served by drone or balloon based wifi access points. These APs are basically cluster heads who provide basic service set functionalities to the clients under them. APs are responsible for client management (client joining and client information maintenance) through transmitting beacon packets, like a traditional 802.11 AP does. Thus a PODNETS cluster gets a wireless 1:n (as of now n < 10 for PODNETS) star network connectivity. The clients may be a traditional wifi node that does not support wifi-direct and can still connect to the AP. During the cluster formation the the AP listens to the standard 2.4 GHz channel # 1,6 and 11 and at the end of the formation AP is responsible for assigning IP addresses to the clients using DHCP. 
 These APs will work as mesh-extender as well as gateway for intercluster communication. APs use multiple physical MAC or can deploy MAC virtualization for simultaneous communication with clients and neighbouring APs. We implement geographical ad-hoc routing algorithm for non-planer network graph using GPS localization for better outdoor routing. Phone number is used as routing table unique id for the user as a novel routing feature. Since the altitude, latitude and longitude are easily accessible along with the phone number from any modern cell phone, we decided to use these information to geographically localize the receiver more precisely.
 
Design Challenges: The biggest challenge is to unleash the wifi direct for multi-hop packet transmission. We need to forward the packet using the geographic ad-hoc routing protocol that demands one-to-one mapping of user’s phone number and location info which is a variable. Moreover, for multi-mode operations the drone AP need to communicate to its own cluster members as well as the neighbouring drone or balloon AP using wifi-direct and requires multi-MAC functionality which is not a part of original standard. These multi-mode wifi chips are expensive and complex to use on board.

Current status of PODNETS: We are at an experiment and validation stage of developing our beta version of multi-hop ad-hoc messenger. The working prototype should achieve multi-hop wifi mesh cluster and wifi access point based multi-mode operation that use geo-routing. Initially we are implementing the text message routing and UDP based SOS broadcasting.
   
Differentiation: There are handful projects under active development to address this acute need of communication for an isolated area specially after a disaster. The Serval Project and DeLorme inReach are two well known projects among those. 
 The Delorme projects exploits satellite links as backhaul connectivity and Serval Project uses proprietary mesh-extender hardware devices to provide coverage. The problem with the satellite link is they need separate hardware that acts as a mediator in between the smartphone and the satellite. That hardware is power hungry and communicates with the cell phone over bluetooth which is a slow link and not scalable like wifi. Serval Project develops their own mesh extender which may result in chronic firmware mismatch problem with different client OS. This pose difficulties for responders.
 On the other hand, PODNETS leverages WiFi and WiFi direct by amending geo-routing protocol over them. We wrap the IP packets inside mesh routing protocol packets. After unwrapping, we get back a simple IP packet. Hence, We believe PODNETS will be more open source and more easy to adopt by larger communities in near future since we are using already well accepted WiFi and WiFi direct standard with minimum alteration.
Affordability: Since PODNETS is an app based networking solution, any community member having access to a basic smart mobile device can afford it. The responders, on the other hand, if are in large number, need to use the drone based APs (that support multi-role wifi supports both wifi and wifi-direct simultaneously)  connectivity. In every case, the deployment cost is zero. PODNETS is capable of broadcasting UDP SOS upon single touch request. PODCAST is an Infrastructure less, multi-hop, crowd networking solution suitable for any socio-economic community in acute need of infrastructure less communication.  
Social ​Impact:  PODNETS is a simple user friendly application which can be easily used by the communities having simple smart phones. The usage of smart phone is very common among most of the communities so this app can have a good reachability and acceptability. Moreover the app is designed in a such way that it helps responders to easily locate the people in need of help. The trapped people in the community can communicate among each other and ask for help. The ad-hoc local communication network developed with PODNETS among the community members themselves and between the community members and the responders shows maximum utilization of the technology and thus have a strong impact on the way a post-disaster situations are approached in these days. PODNETS will revolutionize civil ad-hoc communications techniques and bring manifold rapidity in deploying a communication network.      
Scalability: PODNETS will try to form a cluster of typically less than ten members in a community using wifi in their electronic devices. Various such communities can be formed in the whole area. Since PODNETS will be unleashing the untapped power of wifi-direct technology, it can be made highly scalable. Each community will be assigned with a drone or balloon based AP. Wifi channel 1, channel 6 and channel 7 will be looked for by the adjacent drones. Using this three channel concept we can increase as many clusters as possible without any overlapping channels. These clusters are again interconnected among themselves by drone and balloon based APs. Each cluster member is governed by an AP which makes the connection between clients from one cluster to another. This increases the scalability manifold. Thus, PODNETS can support a sizable number of people in a widespread community 
